
### dv-grouper 

A package for reading, grouping, validating, and documenting DataFrames using Polars, Pandas, PySpark, or GeoPandas. 

#### Reading and Validation

* Read/group related files into DataFrames accessible with `"."` attribute syntax. 
    * Nested directories retain their hierarchical structure (`/` -> `.`)
    * Filter against an expected list of files or a regex pattern (to either include or exclude) 
* Specify a Pandera schema for each DataFrame to validate against when reading from a file or adding an existing DataFrame to the DVGrouper.
    * These schemas are also accessible in `dvg.__internal.schemas.py` (**Do not edit this file directly**).

#### User-Defined Functions 

Write and assign your own functions...
    * ...to a particular DataFrame using the `@dvg.tag_df` decorator (or `<yourDVG>.add_method(func, df=<df_name>)`)
    * ...to all DataFrames in a DVG using the `@dvg.tag_dvg` decorator (or `<yourDVG>.add_method(func, df="all")`)

Tagging a function to a particular DVGrouper/DataFrame automatically includes the function in the correct page of your `MKDocs` documentation and adds type hints to the function definition, in order to validate inputs against the DataFrame's Pandera schema. 

Some Examples: 
* Check a list of columns for statistical normality and include metadata file (`include_in_metadata`)
* Run a P-Test for a correlation between two columns 
* Generate and store plots in a given folder & embed in your project documentation.
* Output any failed schema validation attempts to a log file. 

#### Metadata and Documentation (`MKDocs`)

* Collect metadata on column schema (column types, example values, index column, no. distinct values, missing values), no. of rows, file and column size, ranges of data (e.g. for a "years" column), time last read, I/O time, time last updated.
    * Auto-generate a YAML file with this metadata (`metadata.yaml`) 
    * Incorporate with a separate file (`codebook.yaml`) for manually editing arbitrary fields (e.g. links to external data sources, written descriptions of columns).
* Automatically generate a directory of `MKDocs`-compatible markdown documentation for your DataFrames' metadata and their associated functions. 
    * Add a new DVG to an existing project's documentation.
    * Inject Markdown text blocks (including image or web links) relative to a specified header in the documentation. 

#### REST API (`FastAPI`)

`DVGrouper` encourages the development of data-oriented Python APIs for DataFrame workflows. You can quickly extend your own Python API into a REST API with `FastAPI`.

* Initialize `FastAPI` project and directory structure.
    * Automatically include GET routes for metadata on your DVGroupers, DataFrames, and associated functions.
* Tag your functions with HTTP routes and see these integrated into your `MKDocs` documentation.


